Complete OpenQASM 2 interoperation guide (#1029)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/build/interoperate-qiskit-qasm2.mdx

> The Qiskit SDK provides some tools for converting between OpenQASM representations of quantum programs, and the [QuantumCircuit](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Qiskit SDK provides some tools for converting between OpenQASM representations of quantum programs, and the [QuantumCircuit](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) class.
```

> <span id="import"></span>

Reviewer: (making the anchor more page-specific)

## Import an OpenQASM 2 program into Qiskit

Two functions import OpenQASM 2 programs into Qiskit.
These are [`qasm2.load()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#load), which takes a filename, and [`qasm2.loads()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#loads), which takes the OpenQASM 2 program as a string.

```python
import qiskit.qasm2

qiskit.qasm2.load(filename, include_path=('.',), include_input_directory='append', custom_instructions=(), custom_classical=(), strict=False)
qiskit.qasm2.loads(program, include_path=('.',), custom_instructions=(), custom_classical=(), strict=False)
```

See the [OpenQASM 2 Qiskit API](/api/qiskit/qasm2) for more information.

> ### Importing simple programs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Import simple programs
```

circuit = qiskit.qasm2.load("myfile.qasm")
```

<span id="custom-instructions"></span>

> ### Linking OpenQASM 2 gates with Qiskit gates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Link OpenQASM 2 gates with Qiskit gates
```

By default, Qiskit's OpenQASM 2 importer treats the include file `"qelib1.inc"` as a *de facto* standard library.
The importer treats this file as containing precisely the gates it is described to contain in [the original paper defining OpenQASM 2](https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03429).
Qiskit will use the built-in gates in [the circuit library](../api/qiskit/circuit_library) to represent the gates in `"qelib1.inc"`.
Gates defined in the program by manual OpenQASM 2 `gate` statements will, by default, be constructed as custom [Qiskit `Gate` subclasses](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.Gate).

> You can tell the importer to use specific [`Gate`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.Gate) classes for given `gate` statements it encounters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can tell the importer to use specific [`Gate`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.Gate) classes for the given `gate` statements it encounters.
```

> You can also use this mechanism to treat additional gate names as "built in", that is, not requiring an explicit definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use this mechanism to treat additional gate names as "built-in", that is, not requiring an explicit definition.
```

> Qiskit will typically be more efficient if you can tell it which gate classes it should use for `gate` statements outside of `"qelib1.inc"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For efficiency, specify which gate classes to use for `gate` statements outside of `"qelib1.inc"`.
```

Reviewer: I'm not convinced I've come up with the best sentence here 🤣 but my aim is to take out the anthropomorphism and simplify to a statement of more direct action. Maybe a pair of fresh eyes can help -- will ask around

Author: Haha, no trouble - I have a pretty large habit of anthropomorphising code.  My natural release notes would probably say things like "`qasm2.loads` learned a new keyword argument" and the like - not exactly formal terminology!

Fwiw, does something like:
```suggestion
If you specify which gate classes to use for `gate` statements outside of `"qelib1.inc"`, the resulting circuit will typically be more efficient to work with.
```
help?  I think I've got an awkward word/clause order in that, but just throwing it into the hopper for other ways of saying it.

Reviewer: Yep that sounds better, thanks!

<Admonition type="warning">

> As of Qiskit 1.0, Qiskit's OpenQASM 2 *exporter* (see [Export a Qiskit circuit to OpenQASM 2](#export)) still behaves as if `"qelib1.inc"` has more gates than it really does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of Qiskit SDK 1.0, Qiskit's OpenQASM 2 *exporter* (see [Export a Qiskit circuit to OpenQASM 2](#export)) still behaves as if `"qelib1.inc"` has more gates than it really does.
```

This means that the default settings of the importer might not be able to import a program exported by our importer.

> See [the specific example on working with the legacy exporter](#import-legacy) to resolve this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [the specific example on working with the legacy exporter](#qasm2-import-legacy) to resolve this problem.
```

> See [the specific example on working with the legacy exporter](#import-legacy) for how to resolve this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [the specific example on working with the legacy exporter](#import-legacy) to resolve this problem.
```

> This discrepancy is legacy behavior of Qiskit, and [we are planning to fix it in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This discrepancy is legacy behavior of Qiskit, and [it will be resolved in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737).
```

</Admonition>

> To pass information about a custom instruction to the OpenQASM 2 importer, you use [the `qasm2.CustomInstruction` class](../api/qiskit/qasm2#qiskit.qasm2.CustomInstruction).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To pass information about a custom instruction to the OpenQASM 2 importer, use [the `qasm2.CustomInstruction` class](../api/qiskit/qasm2#qiskit.qasm2.CustomInstruction).
```

This has four required pieces of information, in order:

> * the **name** of the gate, used in the OpenQASM 2 program
> * the **number of angle parameters** that the gate takes
> * the **number of qubits** that the gate acts on
> * the Python **constructor** class or function for the gate, which should take the gate parameters (but not qubits) as individual arguments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The **name** of the gate, used in the OpenQASM 2 program
* The **number of angle parameters** that the gate takes
* The **number of qubits** that the gate acts on
* The Python **constructor** class or function for the gate, which takes the gate parameters (but not qubits) as individual arguments
```

If the importer encounters a `gate` definition that matches a given custom instruction, it will use that custom information to reconstruct the gate object.
If a `gate` statement is encountered that matches the `name` of a custom instruction, but does not match both the number of parameters and the number of qubits, the importer will raise a [`QASM2ParseError`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#qasm2parseerror), to indicate the mismatch between the supplied information and program.

In addition, a fifth argument `builtin` can be optionally set to `True` to make the gate automatically available within the OpenQASM 2 program, even if it is not explicitly defined.
If the importer does encounter an explicit `gate` definition for a built-in custom instruction, it will accept it silently.
As before, if an explicit definition of the same name is not compatible with the provided custom instruction, a [`QASM2ParseError`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#qasm2parseerror) will be raised.

> This is useful for compatibility with older OpenQASM 2 exporters, and with certain other quantum platforms that treat the "basis gates" of their hardware as being built-in instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful for compatibility with older OpenQASM 2 exporters, and with certain other quantum platforms that treat the "basis gates" of their hardware as built-in instructions.
```

This OpenQASM 2 program uses gates that are not in the original version of `"qelib1.inc"` without declaring them, but are standard gates in Qiskit's library.
You can use [`qasm2.LEGACY_CUSTOM_INSTRUCTIONS`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#legacy-compatibility) to easily tell the importer to use the same set of gates that Qiskit's OpenQASM 2 exporter previously used.

```python
from qiskit import qasm2

program = """
    OPENQASM 2.0;
    include "qelib1.inc";

    qreg q[4];
    creg c[4];

    h q[0];
    cx q[0], q[1];

    // 'rxx' is not actually in `qelib1.inc`,
    // but Qiskit used to behave as if it were.
    rxx(0.75) q[2], q[3];

    measure q -> c;
"""
circuit = qasm2.loads(
    program,
    custom_instructions=qasm2.LEGACY_CUSTOM_INSTRUCTIONS,
)
```

#### Example: use a particular gate class when importing an OpenQASM 2 program

Qiskit cannot, in general, verify if the definition in an OpenQASM 2 `gate` statement corresponds exactly to a Qiskit standard-library gate.
Rather than guessing, Qiskit will simply use a custom gate using the precise definition supplied.
This can be less efficient that using one of the built-in standard gates, or a user-defined custom gate.

> You can manually `gate` statements with particular classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manually define `gate` statements with particular classes.
```

    qasm2.CustomInstruction("rzx", 1, 2, RZXGate),
]

program = """
    OPENQASM 2.0;

    gate my(theta, phi) q {
        U(theta / 2, phi, -theta / 2) q;
    }
    gate rzx(theta) a, b {
        // It doesn't matter what definition is
        // supplied, if the parameters match;
        // Qiskit will still use `RZXGate`.
    }

    qreg q[2];
    my(0.25, 0.125) q[0];
    rzx(pi) q[0], q[1];
"""

circuit = qasm2.loads(
    program,
    custom_instructions=custom_instructions,
)
```

#### Example: define a new built-in gate in an OpenQASM 2 program

If the argument `builtin=True` is set, a custom gate does not need to have an associated definition.

```python
from qiskit import qasm2
from qiskit.circuit import Gate

# Define a custom gate that takes one qubit and two angles.
class MyGate(Gate):
    def __init__(self, theta, phi):
        super().__init__("my", 1, [theta, phi])

custom_instructions = [
    qasm2.CustomInstruction("my", 2, 1, MyGate, builtin=True),
]

program = """
    OPENQASM 2.0;
    qreg q[1];

    my(0.25, 0.125) q[0];
"""

circuit = qasm2.loads(
    program,
    custom_instructions=custom_instructions,
)
```

<span id="custom-classical"></span>

> ### Defining custom classical functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Define custom classical functions
```

> OpenQASM 2 includes some built-in classical functions that can be used in gate arguments.
> You can extend the language with more functions by using the `custom_classical` argument to [`qasm2.load()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#load) and [`qasm2.loads()`](../api/qiskit/qasm3#loads), with the [`qasm2.CustomClassical`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#qiskit.qasm2.CustomClassical) class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenQASM 2 includes some built-in classical functions to use in gate arguments.
You can extend the language with more functions by using the `custom_classical` argument to [`qasm2.load()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#load) and [`qasm2.loads()`](../api/qiskit/qasm3#loads), with the [`qasm2.CustomClassical`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#qiskit.qasm2.CustomClassical) class.
```

To define a custom classical function, you must supply:

> * the *name* of the function as it appears in the OpenQASM 2 program
> * the number of floating-point arguments it accepts
> * a callable Python object that evaluates the function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The *name* of the function as it appears in the OpenQASM 2 program
* The number of floating-point arguments it accepts
* A callable Python object that evaluates the function
```

> All defined custom classical functions are treated as built in to the OpenQASM 2 language by the importer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All defined custom classical functions are treated as built-in to the OpenQASM 2 language by the importer.
```

program = '''
    include "qelib1.inc";
    qreg q[2];
    rx(arctan(pi, 3 + add_one(0.2))) q[0];
    cx q[0], q[1];
'''

def add_one(x):
    return x + 1

customs = [
    # Our `add_one` takes only one parameter.
    qasm2.CustomClassical("add_one", 1, add_one),
    # `arctan` takes two parameters, and `math.atan2` implements it.
    qasm2.CustomClassical("atan2", 2, math.atan2),
]
circuit = qasm2.loads(program, custom_classical=customs)
```

<span id="strict"></span>
### Strict mode

> By default, this parser is a little bit more relaxed than the official specification.
> It allows trailing commas in parameter lists; unnecessary (empty-statement) semicolons; the `OPENQASM 2.0;` version statement to be omitted; and a couple of other quality-of-life improvements without emitting any errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, this parser is more relaxed than the official specification.
It allows trailing commas in parameter lists; unnecessary (empty-statement) semicolons; omission of the `OPENQASM 2.0;` version statement; and several other quality-of-life improvements without emitting any errors.
```

However, you can use the "letter-of-the-spec" mode with `strict=True`.

<span id="export"></span>
## Export a Qiskit circuit to OpenQASM 2

Qiskit can also export a [`QuantumCircuit`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) to OpenQASM 2.

> You use the function [`qasm2.dump()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#dump) to write to a file, and [`qasm2.dumps()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#dumps) to write to a string.
> These functions currently have a very simple interface: they accept a circuit, and, only in the case of [`qasm2.dump()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#dump), a location to write the output to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You use the function [`qasm2.dump()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#dump) to write to a file, and [`qasm2.dumps()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#dumps) to write to a string.
These functions currently have a very simple interface: they accept a circuit and, only in the case of [`qasm2.dump()`](../api/qiskit/qasm2#dump), a location to write the output to.
```

<Admonition type="warning">
Qiskit's OpenQASM 2 exporter still assumes a legacy, non-standard version of the `"qelib1.inc"` include file.

> [This will be resolved in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737), but in the mean time, if you need to re-import an OpenQASM 2 program created with Qiskit, use [the example above for how to tell the importer about the legacy gates](#qasm2-import-legacy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[This will be resolved in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737), but in the meantime, if you need to re-import an OpenQASM 2 program created with Qiskit, use [the example above for how to tell the importer about the legacy gates](#qasm2-import-legacy).
```

> [We are planning to fix this in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737), but in the mean time, if you need to re-import an OpenQASM 2 program created with Qiskit, you should use [the example above for how to tell the importer about the legacy gates](#qasm2-import-legacy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[This will be resolved in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737), but in the mean time, if you need to re-import an OpenQASM 2 program created with Qiskit, use [the example above for how to tell the importer about the legacy gates](#qasm2-import-legacy).
```

> [We are planning to fix this in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737), but in the mean time, if you need to re-import an OpenQASM 2 program created with Qiskit, you should use [the example above for how to tell the importer about the legacy gates](#import-legacy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[We are planning to fix this in a later release of Qiskit](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/issues/10737), but in the mean time, if you need to re-import an OpenQASM 2 program created with Qiskit, you should use [the example above for how to tell the importer about the legacy gates](#qasm2-import-legacy).
```
